@pindex dotlock

A stand-alone mailbox-locking utility.  It is the default program used
by @command{mailutils} if the @code{locking.type} configuration
statement is set to @code{external} (@pxref{external locking type}).

The program usage syntax is:

@example
@group
# To lock @var{mbox}:
dotlock @var{options} @var{mbox}
# To unlock it:
dotlock -u @var{options} @var{mbox}
@end group
@end example

By default the program implements the @samp{dotlock} locking
(@pxref{dotlock locking type}).  This can be changed either in the
configuration file, or via the command line options.

The following common configuration statements affect the behavior of
@command{dotlock}:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.6
@headitem Statement @tab Reference
@item debug         @tab @xref{Debug Statement}.
@item locking       @tab @xref{Locking Statement}.
@end multitable

The program understands the following command line options:

@table @option
@item -d
@itemx --debug
Print details of failure reasons to stderr.

@item -f[@var{n}]
@itemx --force[=@var{n}]
If a lock file exists and is more than @var{n} minutes old, forcibly
remove it and re-lock the mailbox.  Default @var{n} is 10 minutes.

@item -p
@itemx --pid-check
Check if the PID of lock owner is still active.  If not, break the
lock.

@item -r @var{n}
@item --retry=@var{n}
Number of times to retry acquiring the lock, if it is held by another
process.  The default is 10 times.

@item -t @var{n}
@itemx --delay=@var{n}
Sets delay in seconds between two successive locking attempts.
The default is 1 second.

@item -u
@itemx --unlock
Unlock the mailbox.
@end table

