@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999--2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@UNREVISED

GNU mailutils provides two commands for listing messages in a mailbox.
These are @command{from} and @command{frm}.

The behavior of both programs is affected by the following
configuration file statements:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.6
@headitem Statement @tab Reference
@item debug   @tab @xref{debug statement}.
@item tls     @tab @xref{tls statement}.
@item mailbox @tab @xref{mailbox statement}.
@item locking @tab @xref{locking statement}.
@end multitable

@subheading @command{frm}
@pindex frm

The @command{frm} utility outputs a header information of
the selected messages in a mailbox.  By default, @command{frm} reads 
user's system mailbox and outputs the contents of @code{From} and
@code{Subject} headers for each message.  If a folder is specified in
the command line, the program reads that folder rather than the default
mailbox.

The following command line options alter the behavior of the program:

@table @option
@item -d
@itemx --debug
Enable debugging output.
@item -f @var{string}
@itemx --field @var{string}
Display the header named by @var{string} instead of @code{From}
@code{Subject} pair.
@item -l
@itemx --to
Include the contents of @code{To} header to the output.  The output field
order is then: @code{To} @code{From} @code{Subject}.
@item -n
@itemx --number
Prefix each line with corresponding message number.
@item -Q
@itemx --Quiet
Be very quiet.  Nothing is output except error messages.  This is useful
in shell scripts where only the return status of the program is
important.
@item -q
@itemx --query
Print a message only if there are unread messages in the mailbox.
@item -S
@itemx --summary
Print a summary line.
@item -s @var{attr}
@itemx --status @var{attr}
Only display headers from messages with the given status.
@var{Attr} may be one of the following: @samp{new}, @samp{read},
@samp{unread}.  It is sufficient to specify only first letter of
an @var{attr}.  Multiple @option{-s} options are allowed.
@item -t
@itemx --align
Tidy mode.  In this mode @command{frm} tries to preserve the alignment of
the output fields.  It also enables the use of BIDI algorithm for
displaying subject lines that contain text in right-to-left
orientation (such as Arabic or Hebrew).
@end table

@subheading @command{from}
@pindex from

The @command{from} utility displays sender and subject of each message
in a mailbox.  By default, it reads the user's system mailbox.  If the
program is given a single argument, it is interpreted as a name of the
user whose mailbox is to be read.  Obviously, permissions are required
to access that user's mailbox, so such invocations may be used only
by superuser.

The option @option{-f} (@option{--file}) instructs @command{from} to read
the given mailbox.

The full list of options, supported by @command{from} follows:

@table @option
@item -c
@itemx --count
Prints only a count of messages in the mailbox and exit.

@item -d
@itemx --debug
Prints additional debugging output.

@item -s @var{string}
@itemx --sender=@var{string}
Prints only mail with @samp{From:} header containing the supplied string.
@FIXME{Probably, this should test envelopes as well.}

@item -f @var{url}
@itemx --file=@var{url}
Examine mailbox from the given @var{url}.
@end table

