@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999--2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@pindex guimb

@command{Guimb} is an experimental tool that iterates over messages in
a mailbox (or several mailboxes), applying a Scheme function to each
of them.

A user-defined @dfn{scheme module} that supplies the function to apply
is specified using the @option{--source} or @option{--file} option.
The module must define at least the following function:

@deffn {User function} guimb-message @var{msg}
Processes message @var{msg}.  This function can alter the message
using Guile primitives supplied by mailutils.
@end deffn

The following function definitions are optional:

@deffn {User function} guimb-getopt @var{args}
If defined, this function is called after @command{guimb} has finished
processing the command line.  @var{args} is a list of unconsumed
command line arguments.

The function is intended to provide a way of configuring the module
from the command line.
@end deffn

@deffn {User function} guimb-end
If defined, this function is called after all mailboxes have been processed.
@end deffn

In the following example we define a module that prints
information about each message is the input mailbox, in a way similar
to @code{frm} utility:

@example
@group
(define-module (frm)
  :export (guimb-message))

(use-modules (mailutils mailutils))
             
(define (guimb-message msg)
  (display (mu-message-get-sender msg))
  (display " ")
  (display (mu-message-get-header msg "subject"))
  (newline))
@end group
@end example

The modules are looked up in directories listed in the global variable
@code{%load-path}.  New directories can be added to that variable on
the fly using the @option{-L} (@option{--load-path}) option.  For
example, if the sample module above was saved in a file
@file{frm.scm} somewhere in the load path, it can be applied to the
current user inbox by running the following command:

@example
guimb --file frm
@end example

@menu
* Specifying Scheme Program to Execute::
* Specifying Mailboxes to Operate Upon::
* Passing Options to Scheme::
* Command Line Option Summary::
@end menu

@node Specifying Scheme Program to Execute
@subheading Specifying Scheme Program to Execute

The Scheme module that defines message processing functions is given
via the following options:

@table @option
@item -s @var{module}
@itemx --source @var{module}
Load Scheme code from @var{module}.

This option stops further argument processing, and passes all
remaining arguments as the value of @var{args} argument to the
@code{guimb-getopt} function, if it is defined.

@item -f @var{module}
@itemx --file @var{module}
Load Scheme source code from @var{module}.  The remaining arguments
are processed in the usual way.  When using this option, you can pass
additional options and or arguments to the module by enclosing them in
@option{-@{} and @option{-@}} options (@pxref{Passing Options to Scheme}).
@end table

An experimental option is provided, that evaluates a supplied
Scheme expression right after loading the module:

@table @option
@item -e @var{expr}
@itemx --expression @var{expr}
Evaluate scheme expression.
@end table

@node Specifying Mailboxes to Operate Upon
@subheading Specifying Mailboxes to Operate Upon

There are four basic ways of passing mailboxes to @command{guimb}.

@table @code
@item guimb [@var{options}] [@var{mailbox}...]
The resulting mailbox is not saved, unless the user-supplied
scheme program saves it.
@item guimb [@var{options}] --mailbox @var{defmbox}
The contents of @var{defmbox} is processed and is replaced with the resulting
mailbox contents.  Useful for applying filters to user's mailbox.
@item guimb [@var{options}] --mailbox @var{defmbox} @var{mailbox} [@var{mailbox}...]
The contents of specified mailboxes is processed, and the resulting
mailbox contents is appended to @var{defmbox}.
@item guimb [@var{options}] --user @var{username} [@var{mailbox}...]
The contents of specified mailboxes is processed, and the resulting
mailbox contents is appended to the user's system mailbox.  This makes
it possible to use @command{guimb} as a mail delivery agent.
@end table

If no mailboxes are specified in the command line, @command{guimb} reads
and processes the system mailbox of the current user.

@node Passing Options to Scheme
@subheading Passing Options to Scheme

Sometimes it is necessary to pass some command line options to the
scheme procedure.  There are three ways of doing so.

When using @option{--source} (@option{-s}) option, the rest of the
command line following the option's argument is passed as the
@var{args} argument to the @code{guimb-getopt} function, if such
function is defined.  This allows for making guimb scripts executable
by the shell.  If your system supports @samp{#!} magic at the start of
scripts, add the following two lines to the beginning of your script
to allow for its immediate execution: 

@example
#! /usr/local/bin/guimb -s
!#
@end example

@noindent
(replace @samp{/usr/local/bin/} with the actual path to the @command{guimb}).

Otherwise, if you use the @option{--file} option, the additional
arguments can be passed to the Scheme program @option{-g} 
(@option{--guile-arg}) command line option.  For example:

@example
guimb --guile-arg -opt --guile-arg 24 --file @var{progfile}
@end example

In this example, the @code{guimb-getopt} function will get the
following argument

@example
( '-opt' 24 )
@end example

Finally, if there are many arguments to be passed to Scheme, it is more
convenient to enclose them in @option{-@{} and @option{-@}} escapes:

@example
guimb -@{ -opt 24 -@} --file @var{progfile}
@end example

@node Command Line Option Summary
@subheading Command Line Option Summary

This is a short summary of the command line options available to
@command{guimb}.

@table @option
@item -d
@itemx --debug
Start with debugging evaluator and backtraces.
@item -e @var{expr}
@itemx --expression @var{expr}
Execute given Scheme expression.
@item -L @var{dir}
@item --load-path @var{dir}
Insert @var{dir} at the beginning of the @code{%load-path} list.  The
argument is either a single directory name, or a list of such names,
delimited by @samp{:} characters.
@item -m @var{path}
@itemx --mail-spool=@var{path}
Set path to the mailspool directory
@item -f @var{progfile}
@itemx --file @var{progfile}
Read Scheme program from @var{progfile}.
@item -g @var{arg}
@itemx --guile-command @var{arg}
Append @var{arg} to the command line passed to Scheme program.
@item -@{ ... -@}
Pass all command line options enclosed between @option{-@{} and @option{-@}}
to Scheme program.
@item -m
@itemx --mailbox @var{mbox}
Set default mailbox name.
@item -u
@itemx --user @var{name}
Act as local MDA for user @var{name}.
@item -h
@itemx --help
Display help message.
@item  -v
@itemx --version
Display program version.
@end table
