@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999--2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@pindex lmtpd
The @acronym{LMTP} is a local mail transport protocol defined in RFC
2033.  GNU Mailutils is shipped with @command{lmtpd} - a daemon for
delivering messages using this protocol.

The daemon shares most of its codebase and configuration with
@command{mda} and consequently provides the same features.
@xref{mda}, for a detailed description of these.

The behavior of @command{lmtpd} is affected by the following configuration
statements:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.6
@headitem Statement @tab Reference
@item server        @tab @xref{Server Settings}
@item acl           @tab @xref{acl statement}.
@item tcp-wrappers  @tab @xref{tcp-wrappers statement}.
@item debug         @tab @xref{debug statement}.
@item mailbox       @tab @xref{mailbox statement}.
@item locking       @tab @xref{locking statement}.
@item pam           @tab @xref{pam statement}.
@item sql           @tab @xref{sql statement}.
@item virtdomain    @tab @xref{virtdomain statement}.
@item radius        @tab @xref{radius statement}.
@item ldap          @tab @xref{ldap statement}.
@item auth          @tab @xref{auth statement}.
@item mailer        @tab @xref{mailer statement}.
@end multitable

@menu
* MeTA1-lmtpd:: Using @command{lmtpd} with MeTA1.
@end menu

@node MeTA1-lmtpd
@subsection Using @command{lmtpd} with MeTA1.
MeTA1 (@uref{http://meta1.org}) communicates with the delivery agent
using @acronym{LMTP}.

The socket to listen for LMTP requests must be specified using the
@code{server} statement (@pxref{Server Settings}).  For the purposes of
this section, let's suppose @command{lmtpd} will listen on a
@acronym{UNIX} socket @file{/var/spool/meta1/lmtpsock}.  Then, the
following (minimal) @command{lmtpd} configuration will do the job:

@example
# @r{Run as daemon.}
mode daemon;
# @r{Switch to this group after startup.}
group meta1c;
# @r{Configure server:}
server unix:///var/spool/meta1/lmtpsock @{
  transcript no;
@};
@end example
  
To configure MeTA1 to use this socket, add the following statement to
the @samp{smtpc} section in @file{/etc/meta1/meta1.conf}:

@example
  LMTP_socket="lmtpsock";
@end example

