@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2019 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@pindex mailutils
The @command{mailutils} utility is a multi-purpose tool shipped with
Mailutils.  It can be used for various mail and database-related
tasks, as well as an auxiliary tool for compiling and linking programs
with Mailutils. 

@menu
* mailutils invocation syntax::
* mailutils help::                Display a terse help summary.
* mailutils info::                Show Mailutils configuration.
* mailutils cflags::              Show compiler options.
* mailutils ldflags::             List libraries required to link.
* mailutils stat::                Show mailbox status.
* mailutils query::               Query configuration values.
* mailutils 2047::                Decode/encode email message headers.
* mailutils filter::              Apply a chain of filters to the input.
* mailutils acl::                 Test access control lists.
* mailutils wicket::              Scan wickets for matching URLs.
* mailutils dbm::                 DBM management tool.
* mailutils logger::              Log data using Mailutils log facility.
* mailutils pop::                 POP3 client shell.
* mailutils imap::                IMAP4 client shell.
* mailutils send::                Send a message.
* mailutils smtp::                Run a SMTP session.
@end menu

@node mailutils invocation syntax
@subsection Invocation Syntax
@command{Mailutils} is a command line tool.  Its invocation syntax is:

@example
mailutils [@var{options}] @var{command} [@var{args}]
@end example

where @var{options} are options that affect the behavior of
@command{mailutils} as a whole, @var{command} instructs it what it is to do
and @var{args} are any arguments the @var{command} needs in order to be
executed. 

The commands are:

@table @asis
@item 2047
Decodes or encodes email message headers.
@item acl
Tests Mailutils access control lists.
@item cflags
Shows compiler options needed to compile with Mailutils.
@item dbm
Invokes a DBM management tool.
@item ;filter
Applies a chain of filters to the input.
@item help
Displays a terse help summary.
@item imap
Invokes an IMAP4 client shell (in development).
@item info
Displays information about Mailutils compile-time configuration.
@item ldflags
Constructs a @command{ld}(1) command line for linking a program with Mailutils.
@item logger
Logs information using Mailutils log facility.
@item pop
Invokes a POP3 client shell.
@item query
Queries configuration values.
@item wicket
Scans wicket for matching URLs
@end table

@node mailutils help
@subsection mailutils help
The @command{mailutils help} command lists all available options and command
names along with short descriptions of what each of them does.  It is
similar to the @command{mailutils --help} option. 

A command name can be supplied as an argument to
@command{help}, in which case it will display a help page for that
particular command, e.g.: 

@example
mailutils help ldflags
@end example

will output help for the @command{ldflags} command.  It is synonymous
to the @option{--help} option used with that particular command, e.g.:
@command{mailutils ldflags --help}.

@node mailutils info
@subsection mailutils info
The @command{mailutils info} command displays information about Mailutils
compile-time configuration.  In normal form its output lists a single
configuration flag per line, e.g.: 

@example
$ mailutils info
VERSION=2.99.93
SYSCONFDIR=/etc
MAILSPOOLDIR=/var/mail/
SCHEME=mbox
LOG_FACILITY=mail
IPV6
USE_LIBPAM
HAVE_LIBLTDL
WITH_GDBM
WITH_GNUTLS
WITH_GSASL
@end example

A configuration flag can consist either of a single word, indicating
that a particular capability has been enabled at compile time, or of a
keyword/value pair delimited by an equal sign, which indicates a
particular value used by default for that feature.  For example,
@samp{IPV6} means that Mailutils was compiled with support for IPv6,
whereas @samp{SYSCONFDIR=/etc} means that the default place for
configuration files is in @file{/etc} directory. 

Such short output is convenient for using @command{mailutils info} in scripts
to decide whether it is possible to use a given feature.  To assist
human users, the @option{--verbose} (@option{-v}) option is provided.
It prints a short description next to each flag: 

@example
$ mailutils info --verbose
VERSION=2.99.93           - Version of this package
SYSCONFDIR=/etc           - System configuration directory
MAILSPOOLDIR=/var/mail/   - Default mail spool directory
SCHEME=mbox               - Default mailbox type
LOG_FACILITY=mail         - Default syslog facility
IPV6                      - IPv6 support
USE_LIBPAM                - PAM support
HAVE_LIBLTDL              - a portable `dlopen' wrapper library
WITH_GDBM                 - GNU DBM
WITH_GNUTLS               - TLS support using GNU TLS
WITH_GSASL                - SASL support using GNU SASL
@end example

@node mailutils cflags
@subsection mailutils cflags
The @command{mailutils cflags} command shows compiler options needed to
compile a C source with Mailutils.  It is intended for use in
configuration scripts and Makefiles, e.g.:

@example
CFLAGS=-g -O2 `mailutils cflags`
@end example

@node mailutils ldflags
@subsection mailutils ldflags
The @command{mailutils ldflags} command is a counterpart of @command{cflags}
which is used for linking.  It constructs a @command{ld} command line
for linking a program with Mailutils.

When used without arguments, it outputs @command{ld} arguments which
would link only with the core Mailutils library @file{libmailutils}, e.g.: 

@example
$ mailutils ldflags
-L/usr/local/lib -lmailutils 
@end example

This command accepts a number of keywords which allow to select a
particular subset of Mailutils libraries to link with.  In particular,
the argument @samp{all} instructs it to link in all available libraries: 

@example
$ mailutils ldflags all
-L/usr/local/lib -lmu_mbox -lmu_mh -lmu_maildir -lmu_imap -lmu_pop \
-lmu_mailer -lmu_compat -lmailutils -lmu_auth -lgsasl -lgnutls -lgcrypt \
-lldap -lgnuradius -lpam -ldl 
@end example

Other available keywords are:

@table @asis
@item mbox
Link in the UNIX mbox format support.
@item mh
Link in the MH format support.
@item maildir
Link in the Maildir format support.
@item imap
Link in the IMAP protocol support.
@item pop
Link in the POP protocol support.
@item nntp
Link in the NNTP protocol support.
@item mailer
Enable support for mailers.
@item sieve
Link in the support for Sieve mail filtering language.
@item dbm
Link in the support for DBM databases (libmu_dbm library).
@item auth
Link in the Mailutils authentication library.
@item guile
Provide Guile language bindings.
@item python
Provide Python language bindings.
@end table

@node mailutils stat
@subsection mailutils stat
The command @command{mailutils stat} shows status of a mailbox.  The
name or URL of the mailbox to operate upon is supplied in the first
argument.  If not given, the command will display status of the
invoking user system mailbox.

@example
$ mailutils stat
type: maildir
path: /var/mail/smith
URL: /var/mail/smith
size: 3498
messages: 24
recent messages: 3
first unseen: 20
uidvalidity: 1338543026
next uid: 87
access: 2016-12-15 09:15:08 +0200
@end example

The output format is controlled by the @option{--format} (@option{-c})
option.  Its argument is the desired format string, composed of
ordinary characters, which are reporduced on standard output verbatim,
backslash sequences, and format specifiers, beginning with @samp{%}.

@dfn{Backslash sequences} are interpreted as in C.

A @dfn{format specifier} consists of a leading @samp{%} followed by a
letter.  Optional @samp{:} may occur between @samp{%} and the letter.
Its presense instructs the program to print the description of the
corresponding value before the value itself.

The following format sequences are understood:

@table @asis
@item %f
Name of the mailbox as supplied in the command line.  If
@command{mailutils stat} was used without explicit mailbox argument,
@samp{%f} is equivalent to @samp{%U}.
@item %t
Type of the mailbox (@samp{mbox}, @samp{maildir}, etc.).  The
description string is @samp{type}.
@item %p
Path to the mailbox.  In case of remote mailboxes, it is the path
part of the mailbox URL.  Description string: @samp{path}.
@item %U
URL of the mailbox.  Description string: @samp{URL}.
@item %s
Size of the mailbox in octets.  Description string: @samp{size}.
@item %c
Number of messages in the mailbox.  Description string:
@samp{messages}.
@item %r
Number of recent (unread) messages in the mailbox.  Description string:
@samp{recent messages}.
@item %u
Index of the first unseen message.  Description string: @samp{first unseen}.
@item %v
The UIDVALIDITY value.  Description string: @samp{uidvalidity}.
@item %n
The UID value which will be assigned to the new message to be
incorporated into the mailbox.  Description string: @samp{next uid}.
@item %a
Access time of the mailbox, as a number of seconds since the epoch.
@item %A
Access time of the mailbox in human-readable format.
@end table

@node mailutils query
@subsection mailutils query
The @command{mailutils query} command queries values from Mailutils
configuration files.  It takes one or more configuration paths
(@pxref{Paths}) as its arguments.  On output, it displays the values
it found, each value on a separate line.  If the requested value is a
block statement it is displayed in full.  For example, if main
configuration file contained:

@example
logging @{
   syslog yes;
   facility mail;
@}
@end example

Then:

@example
$ mailutils query .logging.syslog
syslog yes;
$ mailutils query .logging.syslog .logging.facility
syslog yes;
facility mail;
$ mailutils query .logging
logging @{
  syslog yes;
  facility mail;
@};
@end example

Several command line options allow to modify output format.  The
@option{--value} option instructs the command to output only values:

@example
$ mailutils query --value .logging.syslog
yes
@end example

The @option{--path} option instructs it to print full pathnames for
each value: 

@example
$ mailutils query --path .logging.syslog
logging.syslog: yes
@end example

The @option{--program} option instructs @command{mailutils} to behave as if
it was called under another program name.  For example, the following
command:

@example
$ mailutils query --program=pop3d .server.transcript
@end example

will return the value of the @samp{.server.transcript} statement which
the @command{pop3d} utility would see.

By default, @command{mailutils query} operates on the main configuration
file.  Another configuration file can be supplied using the
@option{--file} (@option{-f}) option:

@example
$ mailutils query --file /usr/local/etc/file.conf .pidfile
@end example

@node mailutils 2047
@subsection mailutils 2047
The @command{mailutils 2047} command is a filter for decoding or encoding
email message headers formatted in accordance with RFC 2047 (see
@uref{http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2047.html}.  By default, it operates
in encode mode and assumes the @samp{iso-8859-1} encoding.  If
arguments are supplied in the command line, they are treated as the
text to operate upon.  Otherwise the command acts as a UNIX filter,
reading lines from the standard input and printing results on the
standard output.

For example:

@example
$ mailutils 2047 'Keld J@o{}rn Simonsen <keld@@dkuug.dk>'
=?ISO-8859-1?Q?Keld_J=F8rn_Simonsen?= <keld@@dkuug.dk>
@end example

The decode mode can be requested via the @option{--decode}
(@option{-d}) option:

@example
$ mailutils 2047 --decode '=?ISO-8859-1?Q?Keld_J=F8rn_Simonsen?= \
 <keld@@dkuug.dk>'
Keld J@o{}rn Simonsen <keld@@dkuug.dk>
@end example

The @option{--charset} (@option{-c}) option changes the default
character set.  It is meaningful both in decode and in encode modes.
In decode mode it instructs the utility to convert the output to the
given character set.  In encode mode it indicates the encoding of the
input data, which will be reflected in the resulting string:

@example
$ mailutils 2047 --charset=utf-8 'Keld J@o{}rn Simonsen <keld@@dkuug.dk>'
=?utf-8?Q?Keld J=C3=B8rn Simonsen <keld@@dkuug.dk>?=
@end example

The @option{--encoding} (@option{-E}) option can be used in encode
mode to change the output encoding.  Valid arguments for this option
are: @samp{quoted-printable} (the default) or @samp{base64}. 

The @option{--newline} (@option{-n}) option prints an additional
newline character after each line of output.

@node mailutils filter
@subsection mailutils filter
The @command{mailutils filter} command applies a chain of filters to the
input.  The filters to apply and their arguments are given  
in the command line.  The full invocation syntax is:

@example
 mailutils filter [@var{option}] @var{filter-chain}
@end example

The syntax for @var{filter-chain} in Backus-Naur form follows:

@example
<filter-chain> ::= <filter> | <filter-chain> "+" <filter>
<filter> ::= <filter-spec> <@var{ARG}>* 
<filter-spec> ::= <@var{WORD}> | "~" <@var{WORD}>
@end example

@noindent
where @var{<WORD>} stands for the filter name and @var{<ARG>}
represents filter arguments.  To obtain a list of known filter names,
run:

@example
mailutils filter --list
@end example

Filters are applied in the order of their appearance, from left to
right and operate in encode mode.  The plus sign has the same meaning
as pipe in shell.  The default mode can be changed using the
@option{--decode} (@option{-d}) and @option{--encode} (@option{-e}) options.
Whatever the default mode is, a @samp{~} character before filter
name reverts the mode for that filter alone. 

For example, to encode the contents of file @file{file.txt} in Base64
run:

@example
mailutils filter base64 < file.txt
@end example

To convert it to base64 and use CRLF as line delimiters, run:

@example
mailutils filter base64 + crlf < file.txt
@end example

The following command will decode the produced output:

@example
mailutils filter --decode crlf + base64
@end example

It can also be written as

@example
mailutils filter ~crlf + ~base64
@end example

The following example converts the input from ISO-8859-2 to UTF-8,
quotes eventual @samp{From} occurring at the beginning of a line,
encodes the result in Base64 and changes line delimiters to CRLF:

@example
mailutils filter iconv iso-8859-2 utf-8 + from + base64 + crlf
@end example

This final example removes UNIX-style comments from the input and
joins continuation lines:

@example
mailutils filter --decode inline-comment -S '#' + linecon 
@end example

Such invocation can be useful in shell scripts to facilitate
configuration file processing.

@node mailutils acl
@subsection mailutils acl
The @command{mailutils acl} command tests Mailutils Access Control Lists.  By
default it reads ACL from the Mailutils configuration file section
@samp{acl}.  The command takes a list of IP addresses as its
arguments, applies the ACL to each of them in turn and prints the result.

To select the ACL to test, two options are provided.  The
@option{--file} (@option{-f}) option supplies the name of
configuration file to read instead of the default one.  The
@option{--path} (@option{-p} option supplies the pathname
(@pxref{Paths}) of the ACL section to use instead of the default @samp{.acl}.  For example, to test ACL in section @samp{server 213.130.1.232} of file @file{/etc/pop3d.conf} use:

@example
mailutils acl --file=/etc/pop3d.conf \
       --path=/server="213.130.1.232"/acl @var{address}
@end example

As an example of its use, consider file @file{test.conf} with the
following contents:

@example
acl @{
        deny from 10.10.10.1;
        deny from 10.10.1.0/24;
        log from any "Connect from $@{address@}";
        allow from 10.0.0.0/8;
        allow from 192.168.1.0/24;
        deny from any;
@}
@end example 

Then, running @command{mailutils acl --file=test.conf 127.0.0.1} you will get:

@example
Testing 127.0.0.1:
mailutils: Connect from 127.0.0.1
127.0.0.1: deny
@end example

More examples:

@example
$ mailutils acl --file=test.conf 127.0.0.1 10.10.10.1 \
         10.10.1.3 10.5.3.1 192.168.1.0 192.168.2.0
Testing 127.0.0.1:
mailutils: Connect from 127.0.0.1
127.0.0.1: deny
Testing 10.10.10.1:
10.10.10.1: deny
Testing 10.10.1.3:
10.10.1.3: deny
Testing 10.5.3.1:
mailutils: Connect from 10.5.3.1
10.5.3.1: accept
Testing 192.168.1.0:
mailutils: Connect from 192.168.1.0
192.168.1.0: accept
Testing 192.168.2.0:
mailutils: Connect from 192.168.2.0
192.168.2.0: accept
@end example

The @command{mailutils} option @option{--debug-level} will give you a deeper
insight into the address matching algorithm:

@example
$ mailutils --debug-level=acl.trace9 acl --file test.conf 127.0.0.1
Testing 127.0.0.1:
mailutils: Checking sockaddr 127.0.0.1
mailutils: 1:deny: Does 10.10.10.1/255.255.255.255 match 127.0.0.1? no; 
mailutils: 2:deny: Does 10.10.1.0/255.255.255.0 match 127.0.0.1? no; 
mailutils: 3:log: Does any match 127.0.0.1? yes; 
mailutils: Expanding "Connect from $@{address@}";
mailutils: Expansion: "Connect from 127.0.0.1";. 
mailutils: Connect from 127.0.0.1
mailutils: 4:accept: Does 10.0.0.0/255.0.0.0 match 127.0.0.1? no; 
mailutils: 5:accept: Does 192.168.0.0/255.255.0.0 match 127.0.0.1? no; 
mailutils: 6:deny: Does any match 127.0.0.1? yes; 
127.0.0.1: deny
@end example

@xref{Debugging Categories,acl}.

@node mailutils wicket
@subsection mailutils wicket
The @command{mailutils wicket} command looks up matching URLs in the
Mailutils ticket file (by default, @file{~/.mu-tickets}) and prints
them.  The URLs to look for are supplied in the command line.

Consider the following ticket file as an example:

@example
smtp://foo:bar@@*
smtp://bar:baz@@gnu.org
*://baz:qux@@*
*://quux:bar@@gnu.org
@end example

Now, running @command{mailutils wicket smtp://bar@@gnu.org} will show:

@example
smtp://bar@@gnu.org: /home/@var{user}/.mailutils-tickets:2
@end example

@noindent
(where @var{user} is your login name).  This means that this URL
matches the line 2 in your @file{.mailutils-tickets} file.  The
@command{wicket} command does not show the actual matching line to
avoid revealing eventual security-sensitive information.  You can
instruct it to do so using the @option{--verbose} (@option{-v})
option:

@example
$ mailutils wicket -v smtp://bar@@gnu.org
smtp://bar@@gnu.org: /home/@var{user}/.mu-tickets:2: smtp://bar:***@@gnu.org
@end example

As you see, even in that case the tool hides the actual password part
by replacing it with three asterisks.  If you are working in a secure
environment, you can tell @command{mu wicket} to show passwords as
well, by supplying the @option{-v} option twice.

A counterpart of @option{--verbose} is the @option{--quite}
(@option{-q}) option, which instructs @command{wicket} to suppress any
output, excepting error messages.  This can be used in scripts, which
analyze the @command{mailutils wicket} exit code to alter the control flow.

The @command{mailutils wicket} tool exits with code 0 if all URLs were
matched and with code 1 if some of them were not matched in the ticket
file.  If an error occurred, the code 2 is returned.

@node mailutils dbm
@subsection mailutils dbm
The @command{mailutils dbm} tool manages DBM files using @file{libmu_dbm}
The invocation syntax is:

@example
mailutils dbm @var{subcommand} [@var{options}] @var{file} [@var{keys}]
@end example
@noindent
or
@example
mailutils dbm [@var{options}] @var{subcommand} @var{file} [@var{keys}]
@end example

@noindent
where @var{subcommand} selects the operation mode, @var{options}
modify the tool behavior and @var{file} specifies the DBM file to
operate upon.  Some @var{command}s allow for optional @var{keys} to be
specified.

The @var{file} argument can be either a DBM file name or a Database URL. 

@menu
* Create a Database::
* Add Records to a Database::
* Delete Records::
* List the Database::
* Dump the Database::
* Dump Formats::
* Dbm Exit Codes::
@end menu

@node Create a Database
@subsubsection Create a Database
The @option{create} subcommand and its synonym @option{load} instruct
the tool to create a new database: 

@example
mailutils dbm create file.db
@end example

If the argument file already exists, it will be truncated prior to
adding new records to it.

The data to populate the database with are read from the standard
input.  The @command{mailutils dbm} command supports several formats for
these data, which are discussed later.  In the simplest case (a so
called @samp{format 0.0}) each input line must consist of two fields
separated by any amount of whitespace.  The first field is treated as
a key and the second one as the corresponding value. 

The usual way to read data from a file is, of course, by redirecting
the file to the standard input as in: 

@example
mailutils dbm create file.db < input.txt
@end example

There is also a special option for that purpose: @option{--file}
(@option{-f}).  Thus, the following command is equivalent to the one
above:

@example
mailutils dbm create --file input.txt file.db 
@end example

The @option{--file} option has the advantage that it allows, in
conjunction with another options, for copying input file metadata
(owner UID, GID and file mode) to the created database.  For example,
the following command ensures that the created database file will have
the same metadata as the input file: 

@example
mailutils dbm create --file input.txt --copy-permissions file.db
@end example

The @option{--copy-permissions} (@option{-P}) option is the one that
does the job.

There are also other ways to control mode and ownership of the created
database, which are described below. 

More advanced dump formats (e.g.  @samp{version 1.0} format) carry
additional information about the file, including its original name,
ownership and mode.  If input is in one of these formats, the file
name argument becomes optional.  If it is not supplied, the name
stored in the input stream will be used.  For example, supposing that
the file @file{users.dump} is in format 1.0, the following command
suffices to restore the original filename, ownership, mode and, of
course, data:

@example
mailutils dbm create --file users.dump
@end example

@node Add Records to a Database
@subsubsection Add Records to a Database
The @option{add} subcommand adds records to a database.  Records are
read from the standard input and must be formatted as for
@option{create}:

@example
mailutils dbm add file.db
@end example

If the argument file does not exist, it will be created.  

Adding a record with a key which is already present in the database
produces an error.  To replace existing records, use the
@option{replace} subcommand instead.   

The same options that affect the behavior of @option{create} apply to
@option{add} and @samp{replace} as well, e.g.:

@example
mailutils dbm replace --file input.txt --copy-permissions file.db
@end example

@node Delete Records
@subsubsection Delete Records
To delete records, use the @option{delete} subcommand.  It reads a
list of keys to delete to be specified as arguments in the command
line: 

@example
mailutils dbm delete file.db foo bar
@end example

The command above will delete from @file{file.db} records with keys
@samp{foo} and @samp{bar}.  

It is not an error to attempt to delete a key that does not exist in
the database, although such use will produce a warning message.

By default, keys are matched literally.  It is also possible to use
various pattern matching techniques, depending on the option
specified. 

The @option{--glob} (@option{-G}) option instructs the tool to use UNIX globbing pattern matching.  For example, the command below will delete all keys starting with @samp{foo} and ending with a decimal digit:

@example
mailutils dbm delete file.db 'foo*[0-9]'
@end example

@noindent
(note the quoting necessary to prevent shell from interpreting the
metacharacters itself).

Another option, @option{--regex} (@option{-R}) instructs @command{mailutils}
to treat supplied keys as extended regular expressions: 

@example
mailutils dbm delete --regex file.db 'foo.*[0-9]@{1,3@}'
@end example

Both options are affected by the @option{--ignore-case} (@option{-i})
option, which turns on case-insensitive matching.

Using pattern matching to delete records can be a risky operation as
selecting a wrong pattern will lead to removing wrong records.  It is
recommended to first use the list mode described below to verify that
the patterns match the right keys.

@node List the Database
@subsubsection List the Database
The @option{list} command lists the content of the database:

@example
mailutils dbm list file.db
@end example

By default, entire content is listed on the standard output.

If supplied more than one command line argument, this mode treats the
rest of arguments after the database file name as the keys to look for
and lists only records with these keys:

@example
$ mailutils dbm list file.db foo bar
foo 1
bar 56
@end example

The @option{--glob} and @option{--regex} options instruct the tool to
use UNIX globbing or extended regular expression matching,
correspondingly.  These were described in detail above. 

@node Dump the Database
@subsubsection Dump the Database

The @option{dump} subcommand dumps the database to the standard output
in a format suitable for backup or sending over the network (a
version 1.0 format). 

@example
mailutils dbm dump file.db < file.dump
@end example

The produced file is suitable for input to the @option{create} (@option{load}) command.  Among other uses, it provides an easy way to convert databases between various formats supported by Mailutils.  For example this is how to convert the database file @file{file.db} to the GDBM database @file{new.db}:

@example
mailutils dbm dump file.db | mailutils dbm create gdbm://new.db
@end example

Both @option{list} and @option{dump} subcommands share the same set of
options.  In fact, they are pretty similar, except that use different
defaults.  The @option{list} subcommand is designed to produce a
human-readable output, whereas the dump subcommand is oriented towards
backup purposes.

@node Dump Formats
@subsubsection Dump Formats
As of version @value{VERSION}, @command{mailutils dbm} supports two formats
for dumping DBM databases.  Both formats are line-oriented.  Comments
are introduced with a sharp (@samp{#}) sign in the column 0 of a line,
followed by at least one white space character (space or tab).  Sharp
sign followed by a colon (@samp{#:}) introduces a @dfn{pragmatic
comment}, which carries some additional information to the loader. 

@anchor{dump version 0.0}
The @dfn{version 0.0} format is suitable for databases whose records
contain only ASCII data.  In this format, each record occupies a
separate line, which consists of the key and value separated by a
single @sc{tab} character.  Empty lines are ignored.  For example: 

@example
$ mailutils list /etc/mail/users.db
root    guessme
smith   pAssword
qed     fooBar
@end example

The output in version 0.0 format is human readable and can be used as
input to the popauth utility (@FIXME-pxref{popauth}.  However, version 0.0
has serious drawbacks.  First of all, it is not suitable for databases
that contain binary data.  Secondly, it cannot properly handle keys
beginning with a sharp sign or containing @sc{tab}.  The version 1.0
format is free from these drawbacks. 

@anchor{dump version 1.0}
The @dfn{version 1.0} dump format begins with a @dfn{header}
containing important information about the file, such as its file
name, ownership and file mode.  This information is stored in
pragmatic comments and allows @command{mailutils dbm load} to easily recreate
an exact copy of the file.  The following comments are defined:

@table @asis
@item #:version=1.0
Indicates that the data that follow are in version 1.0 format. 
@item #:filename=@var{s}
Original database file name, without directory parts. 
@item #:uid=@var{n}
Owner UID. 
@item #:user=@var{s}
Owner name. 
@item #:gid=@var{n}
Owner GID 
@item #:group=@var{s}
Owner group name. 
@item #:mode=@var{o}
File mode in octal
@end table
    
Following this header are actual data.  Each record is output in two
parts: key and value.  Each part begins with a @samp{#:len=@var{n}}
construct on a line by itself, where @var{n} is the length of the data
in decimal.  This line is followed by one or more lines of the actual
data, encoded in base64.  The data are formatted so that each line
does not exceed 76 bytes in length (not counting the terminating
newline).  An example of this format follows: 

@example
# Database dump file created by GNU Mailutils 2.99.93 on
# Tue Nov  1 13:28:03 2011
#:version=1.0
#:file=users.db
#:uid=0,user=root,gid=25,group=mail,mode=640
#:len=6
c21pdGgA
#:len=9
cEFzc3dvcmQA
#:len=5
cm9vdAA=
#:len=8
Z3Vlc3NtZQA=
#:len=4
cWVkAA==
#:len=7
Zm9vQmFyAA==
@end example

@node Dbm Exit Codes
@subsubsection Dbm Exit Codes
The table below summarizes exit codes used by @command{mailutils dbm}:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.3 0.5
@headitem Code  @tab Symbolic name @tab Meaning
@item 0 @tab EX_OK @tab Successful termination
@item 64 @tab EX_USAGE @tab Command line usage error
@item 65 @tab EX_DATAERR @tab Error in user-supplied data: the input
file is badly formatted, or some of the data supplied in the command
line are invalid (e.g. user name, uid or the like), etc.
@item 66 @tab EX_NOINPUT @tab Cannot open input file
@item 67 @tab EX_NOUSER  @tab No such user or UID when trying to set
output file ownership 
@item 69 @tab EX_UNAVAILABLE @tab Operation cannot be performed due to
some kind of problem (e.g. access to the file denied, etc.)
@item 70 @tab EX_SOFTWARE @tab Internal software error
@item 74 @tab EX_IOERR @tab Input/output error
@end multitable

@node mailutils logger
@subsection mailutils logger
The @command{mailutils logger} tool logs information using Mailutils log facility.  

Syntax:

@example
mailutils logger [@var{options}] [@var{message}]
@end example

The @var{message} argument, if supplied, gives the text to log.  If not supplied, the utility reads lines of text from standard input or a file (if the @option{--file} option is given) and sends them to log:

@example
# Send text to log
$ mailutils logger I am here
# Log each line from file.txt
$ mailutils logger --file file.txt
# Read stdin and log it:
$ mailutils logger
@end example

The default logging channel is bound to standard error.  To bind it to
syslog, use the @option{--syslog} command line option.  In that case
@command{mailutils} uses facility @samp{user} and priority @samp{err}.  You
can change this by using the @option{--priority} (@option{-p}) option.
Its argument is either a syslog facility name or facility and severity
names separated by a dot.  For example, the following invocation will use
facility @samp{auth}, severity @samp{info}: 

@example
mailutils logger --priority auth.info
@end example

The syslog tag can be set using the @option{--tag} (@option{-t}) option:

@example
mailutils logger --tag myprog
@end example

The default tag is @samp{mu-logger}.

The @option{--severity} (@option{-s}) option sets the Mailutils
severity level.  Its argument can be any of the following:
@samp{debug}, @samp{info}, @samp{notice}, @samp{warning},
@samp{error}, @samp{crit}, @samp{alert}, @samp{emerg}. 

Finally, the @option{--locus} (@option{-l}) option binds log messages
to a location in a file.  Its argument has the following syntax:

@example
@var{file}:@var{line}[:@var{col}]
@end example

@noindent
where @var{file} is the file name, @var{line} is the line number and
optional @var{col} is the column number in that file.

For example, the following invocation:

@example
mailutils logger --locus mailutils.conf:34 Suspicious statement
@end example

will send the following to the log:

@example
mu-logger: mailutils.conf:34: Suspicious statement
@end example

@node mailutils pop
@subsection mailutils pop
The @command{mailutils pop} command invokes an interactive POP3 client shell.
It reads commands from the standard input, executes them and displays
the results on the standard output.  If the standard input is
connected to a terminal, the readline and history facilities are
enabled (provided that Mailutils is configured with GNU Readline). 

The @command{mailutils pop} commands form two major groups.  POP3 protocol
commands interact with the remote POP3 server and display responses
obtained from it.  These commands are named after their POP3
equivalents.  Another group, @dfn{internal commands}, are used to
configure the shell itself.

@subsubheading POP protocol commands
@table @asis
@item connect [-tls] @var{hostname} [@var{port}]
Open connection to @var{hostname}.  If the @option{-tls} option is
given, TLS encryption (also known as POPS protocol) will be used.  If
@var{port} argument is not given, the command uses port 110 for a
plain POP connection or 995 for POPS (if @option{-tls} is given).  

@item stls
Start TLS negotiation.  This command is valid only after successful
unencrypted connection has been initiated (using @command{connect}
without @option{-tls} argument).

@item user @var{name}
Send user name to the server.  The @command{pass} command must follow.

@item pass [@var{password}] 
Send password.  This command is valid only after @command{user}.  If
the @var{password} argument is omitted, the shell will ask you to
enter it.  While entering, both echoing and history recording will be
disabled.  Use this to avoid compromising your password.

@item apop @var{user} [@var{password}] 
Authenticate with APOP.   If the @var{password} argument is omitted,
you will be asked to supply it.  While entering, both echoing and
history recording will be disabled. 

@item capa [-reread] [@var{name}...] 
List server capabilities.  Any number of arguments is accepted.  If given, the shell will display only the named capabilities, otherwise it displays entire list.  By default @command{capa} reuses the response of its previous invocation (if there was any), instead of resending the @samp{CAPA} command to the server.  To force it do so, use the @option{-reread} option. 

@item noop 
Send a @samp{NOOP} (@dfn{no operation}) command to the server.

@item stat
Get the mailbox size and number of messages in it.

@item uidl [@var{number}]
Shows unique message identifiers.  Without arguments, shows
identifiers for each message in the mailbox.  If @var{number} is
given, the command returns the UIDL of that particular message only.

@item list [@var{number}]
Lists messages.  See above for the meaning of @var{number}.  Each line
of the produced listing contains describes a single message and
contains at least the message number and size in bytes.  Depending on
the POP3 server implementation, additional fields may be present.  For
example, Mailutils @command{pop3d} can also output number of lines in
the message in the additional third field. 

@item retr @var{number}
Retrieve a message.

@item top @var{msgno} [@var{number}] 
Display message headers and first @var{number} (default 5) of lines of its body.

@item dele @var{number}
Mark message for deletion.

@item rset
Remove deletion marks.

@item quit
Quit pop3 session.

@item disconnect
Close existing connection.
@end table

@subsubheading Internal commands
@table @asis
@item verbose [on|off|mask|unmask] [secure [payload]]
Control output verbosity.  Without arguments the @command{verbose}
command shows current settings.

The argument @samp{off} (the default) turns off all additional output.
The @samp{verbose on} command enables POP3 protocol tracing output.
Additional arguments can be used to provide more verbosity.  The
@samp{secure} argument enables display of user passwords in the trace
output and the @samp{payload} argument enables showing payload data
(e.g. response body sent in the reply to @samp{RETR} command, etc.)
Thus, the full diagnostics output is obtained by 

@example
verbose on secure payload
@end example

The @samp{mask} and @samp{unmask} arguments allow to disable and
enable such additional verbosity.  For example, supposing the command
above is in action, the following command will suppress the display of
user passwords in the traces:

@example
verbose mask secure
@end example

Similarly, @command{verbose unmask secure} will turn it back again.

@item prompt @var{string}
Set command prompt.  The argument can contain @dfn{variable
references} in any of the following forms:

@example
$@var{name}
$@{@var{name}@}
@end example

@noindent
where @var{name} is the variable name.  Such references are expanded
to the actual value of the variable at the time of expansion.  The
following variables are defined:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.4 0.6
@headitem Variable @tab Expansion
@item user @tab Login name of the authenticated POP3 user.  If the session is not authenticated yet, expands to @samp{[nouser]}.
@item host @tab Name of the remote host, or @samp{[nohost]} if no
connection is established. 
@item program-name @tab Name of the program, as typed on the command
line to invoke it. 
@item canonical-program-name @tab @samp{mailutils}
@item package @tab @samp{Mailutils}
@item version @tab Mailutils version number (@value{VERSION})
@item status @tab Session status.  One of: @samp{disconnected},
@samp{connected} or @samp{logged in}.
@end multitable

For example:

@example
prompt "[$@{user@}@@$host "
@end example

Notice the use of quotes to include the space character in the prompt.

@item exit
Exit the program.

@item help [@var{command}]
@itemx ? [@var{command}]
Without arguments displays a list of commands with possible arguments
and short descriptions.

With one argument, displays a terse description for the given @var{command}.

@item history
Shows command history.
@end table

@node mailutils imap
@subsection mailutils imap
The @command{mailutils imap} command invokes an interactive IMAP4 client
shell.  It reads commands from the standard input, executes them and
displays the results on the standard output.  The shell is similar to
the @command{mailutils pop} (@pxref{mailutils pop}) shell.

@subsubheading IMAP protocol commands

Most commands in this group correspond (with minor differences) to
IMAP commands described in RFC 3501@footnote{See
@uref{http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3501.html}.}.

@deffn {imap command} connect [-tls] @var{host} [@var{port}]
Opens connection to the server @var{host}.  If the @option{-tls}
option is given, TLS encryption (also known as IMAPS protocol) will be
used.  If @var{port} argument is not supplied, the command uses port
143 for a plain IMAP connection or 993 for IMAPS (if @option{-tls} is
given).
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} capability [-reread] [@var{name}...]
Lists server capabilities.  Any number of @var{name}s is accepted.  If
at least one is given, the shell will display only the named
capabilities, otherwise it displays the entire list.  By default,
@command{capability} reuses the response of its previous invocation
(if there was any), instead of resending the CAPABILITY command to the
server.  To force it do so, use the @option{-reread} option. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} starttls
Starts TLS negotiation.  This command is valid only after unencrypted
connection has been successfully initiated using connect without the
@option{-tls} option.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} login @var{user} [@var{password}] 
Logs in to the server as @var{user} with optional @var{password}.  If
the pass argument is omitted, the shell will ask you to enter it.
While entering, both echoing and history recording will be disabled.
Use this to avoid compromising your password.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} logout
@deffnx {imap command} quit
Quits the imap session.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} id [-test @var{kw}] [@var{arg}...]
Sends IMAP ID command.  See RFC
2971@footnote{@uref{http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2971.html}}, for a
discussion of arguments.  By default, this command outputs entire ID
list. If, however, the @option{-test} option is given, it will check whether
the keyword @var{kw} is defined and display its value if so.  
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} check
Requests a server checkpoint.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} select [@var{mbox}]
Selects the named mailbox. Without argument, selects @samp{INBOX}. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} examine [@var{mbox}]
Examines the named mailbox, i.e. selects it in read-only mode.  If
@var{mbox} is not given, @samp{INBOX} is assumed.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} status @var{mbox} @var{kw} [@var{kw}...]
Gets mailbox status.  Valid keywords (@var{kw} arguments) are:
@samp{MESSAGES}, @samp{RECENT}, @samp{UIDNEXT}, @samp{UIDVALIDITY},
and @samp{UNSEEN}.  Keywords are case-insensitive. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} fetch @var{msgset} @var{items}
Fetches message data.  See RFC 3501, section
6.4.5@footnote{@uref{http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3501#section-6.4.5}},
for a discussion of its arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} store @var{msgset} @var{items}
Alters mailbox data.  See RFC 3501, section
6.4.6@footnote{@uref{http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3501#section-6.4.6}},
for a discussion of its arguments. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} close
Closes the currently selected mailbox (with expunge). 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} unselect
Closes the currently selected mailbox (without expunge). 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} delete @var{mbox}
Deletes the mailbox @var{mbox}. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} rename @var{old-name} @var{new-name}
Renames existing mailbox @var{old-name} to @var{new-name}.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} expunge
Permanently removes messages marked for deletion. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} create @var{name}
Creates new mailbox with the given @var{name}.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} append [-time @var{datetime}] [-flag @var{flag}] @var{mailbox} @var{file}
Reads an RFC-822 message from @var{file} and appends it to the
@var{mailbox}.  Use the @option{-time} option to supply envelope date
for the message.  Use the @option{-flag} option to supply message
flags.  For example:  

@example
append -time "25-Aug-2002 18:00:00 +0200" -flag \Seen INBOX input.msg
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} list @var{ref} @var{mbox}
Lists matching mailboxes.  See RFC 3501, section
6.3.8@footnote{@uref{http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3501#section-6.3.8}},
for a discussion of its arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} lsub @var{ref} @var{mbox}
Lists subscribed mailboxes (RFC 3501, section 6.3.9@footnote{@uref{http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3501#section-6.3.9}}). 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} subscribe @var{mbox}
Subscribes to a mailbox. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} unsubscribe @var{mbox}
Removes mailbox @var{mbox} from the subscription list. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} noop
Sends a @dfn{no operation} command. 
@end deffn

@deffn {imap command} disconnect
Closes existing connection. 
@end deffn

@subsubheading Internal commands
The @code{imap} shell implements the same set of internal commands as
@code{pop} shell: @xref{mailutils pop, Internal commands}.  There is
only one imap-specific internal command:

@deffn {imap command} uid [on|off]
Controls the UID mode.  When the UID mode is on, the commands
@code{fetch} and @code{store} operate on and return message UIDs
instead of their sequence numbers.  

To examine the current state of the UID mode, issue the @code{uid}
command without arguments.
@end deffn

@node mailutils send
@subsection mailutils send
Reads an RFC-822 message from a file and sends it over to a specified
SMTP server.  The syntax is: 

@example
mailutils send [@var{options}] @var{host} @var{file}
@end example

@noindent
where @var{host} defines the SMTP server through which to send the
message, and @var{file} is the name of the input file containing the
message.  For example, to send a message from file @file{input.msg}
using SMTP service at localhost, one would write:

@example
$ mailutils send localhost input.msg
@end example

The @var{host} argument can be an IP address, hostname, or a
valid SMTP URL. 

The following command line options are understood:

@table @option
@item -F @var{address}
@itemx --from=@var{address}
Supplies envelope sender address.

@item -T @var{address}
@itemx --rcpt=@var{address}
Supplies envelope recipient address.  It can be specified multiple
times.

@item -t
@itemx --read-recipients
Instructs the program to read recipient email addresses from the
message @samp{To:}, @samp{Cc:}, and @samp{Bcc:} headers.
@end table
    
@node mailutils smtp
@subsection mailutils smtp
The @code{mailutils smtp} command invokes an interactive SMTP client
shell.  It reads commands from the standard input, executes them and
displays the results on the standard output.  If the standard input is
connected to a terminal, the readline and history facilities are
enabled (provided that Mailutils is configured with GNU Readline).

@subsubheading Initializing connection

@deffn {smtp command} connect [-tls] @var{host} [@var{port}]
Connects to SMTP server at @var{host} (IP address or host name).  If
the @option{-tls} option is given, TLS encryption (also known as SMTPS
protocol) will be used.  The default port number is 25 for plain SMTP
and 465 for SMTPS.  Explicit @var{port} argument overrides the default
value.  
@end deffn

@subsubheading Connection parameters

A number of parameters is associated with an open connection:

@table @asis
@item domain
Domain name used in EHLO statement.  Defaults to the current host name. 
@end table

The following parameters are used for ESMTP authentication:

@table @asis
@item username
User name. 
@item password
User password. 
@item service
GSASL service name. 
@item realm
Realm name. 
@item host
Host name.
@item url
SMTP URL.  It can contain all of the above. Default is smtp:// 
@end table

These parameters are manipulated using the following statements:

@deffn {smtp command} set @var{param} @var{value} [@var{param} @var{value}...]
Sets parameter @var{param} to @var{value}.  Several parameters can be
set with one @command{set} statement.  
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} clear [@var{param}...]
Unset the supplied connection parameters.  If used without arguments,
unsets all parameters.  
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} list [@var{param}...]
Lists the values of the connection parameters.  If used without
arguments, lists all parameters. 
@end deffn

@subsubheading SMTP commands
@deffn {smtp command} ehlo [@var{domain}]
Sends the ESMTP greeting.  Unless @var{domain} is supplied, the
connection parameter @samp{domain} is used.  
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} capa [@var{name}...]
Lists the server capabilities. 
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} starttls
Initiates encrypted connection.  This command is disabled if the
connection is opened with the @option{-tls} option.
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} auth @var{mech} [@var{mech}...]
Authenticate using the supplied mechanisms.
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} rset
Reset the session state.
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} from [@var{email}]
Sets sender email address.  If used without arguments, prints the
sender email address.
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} to [@var{email}]
Sets recipient email address.  If used without arguments, prints all
recepient names collected so far.
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} smtp @var{command} [@var{args}...]
Sends the @var{command} with its arguments verbatim. 
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} quit
Quits the SMTP session. 
@end deffn

@deffn {smtp command} send [@var{file}]
Reads the message from @var{file} and sends it.  If @var{file} is not
supplied, the action depends on whether a @code{send} command was used
prevously within the same session.  If so, @command{mailutils} will
first ask whether to reuse the already supplied message.  If not, it
will start an editor, allowing you to enter the new message.  When you
exit from the editor, you will be prompted what to do with the
message: send, edit, or quit (discard) it.
@end deffn

@subsubheading Internal commands

Internal commands are the same as in @code{pop} shell: @xref{mailutils
pop, Internal commands}.

