@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2019 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@pindex movemail
The purpose of @command{movemail}, as its name implies, is to move mail
from one location to another.  For example, the following invocation:

@example
movemail /var/mail/smith INBOX
@end example

@noindent
moves messages from file @file{/var/mail/smith} to file @file{INBOX}.

The program was initially intended as a replacement for
@command{movemail} from GNU Emacs.  The @command{movemail} program is
run by Emacs @code{Rmail} module.  @xref{Rmail,,,emacs,Reading Mail
with Rmail}, for detailed description of @code{Rmail} interface.

Mailutils version of @command{movemail} is fully
backward-compatible with its Emacs predecessor, so it should run
flawlessly with older versions of Emacs.  Emacs versions
starting from 22.1 contain improved @code{Rmail} interface and
are able to take advantage of all new features mailutils
@command{movemail} provides.

Apart from that use, @command{movemail} proved to be a useful tool for
incorporating mail from remote mailboxes into the local one.  See
@uref{http://mailutils.org/wiki/Fetching_Mail_with_Movemail, Fetching
Mail with Movemail}, for a detailed discussion with usage recipes.

@menu
* Movemail Configuration::
* Ownership::            Setting Destination Mailbox Ownership
* Summary::              Short Movemail Invocation Summary
@end menu

@node Movemail Configuration
@subsection Movemail Configuration
@cindex movemail, configuration
The following configuration file statements affect the behavior of
@command{movemail}:

@deffn {Movemail Config} preserve @var{bool}
If @var{bool} is @samp{true}, do not remove messages from the source mailbox.
@end deffn

@deffn {Movemail Config} reverse @var{bool}
If @var{bool} is @samp{true}, reverse message sorting order.
@end deffn

@deffn {Movemail Config} emacs @var{bool}
If @var{bool} is @samp{true}, output information used by Emacs rmail interface.
@end deffn

@deffn {Movemail Config} ignore-errors @var{bool}
Continue moving messages after errors.  By default,
@command{mailfromd} exits immediately if it cannot copy a message.
@end deffn

@deffn {Movemail Config} program-id @var{fmt}
Set program identifier, i.e. a string which will prefix all
diagnostic messages issued by the program.  By default, program
name is used.

@anchor{movemail-program-id}
The @var{fmt} is a format string that may contain references to the
following variables (@pxref{Variables}):

@table @code
@item progname
The program name.

@item source
URL of the source mailbox.

@item source_user
User part of the source mailbox URL.

@item source_host
Host part of the source mailbox URL.

@item source_path
Path part of the source mailbox URL.

@item dest
URL of the destination mailbox

@item dest_user
User part of the destination mailbox URL.

@item dest_host
Host part of the destination mailbox URL.

@item dest_path
Path part of the destination mailbox URL.
@end table

Setting @code{program-id} may be necessary if several @code{movemail}
instances are run simultaneously (e.g. invoked from a script) to
discern between the instances.  For example:

@example
program-id "$@{progname@}: $@{source@} => $@{dest@}"
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn {Movemail Config} uidl @var{bool}
Avoid copying the message if a message with the same UIDL already
exists in the destination mailbox.
@end deffn

@deffn {Movemail Config} verbose @var{level}
Set verbosity level.
@end deffn

@deffn {Movemail Config} mailbox-ownership @var{method-list}
Define list of methods for setting ownership of the destination
mailbox.  The @var{method-list} argument can contain the following
elements:

@anchor{mailbox-ownership-methods}
@table @asis
@item copy-id
Copy owner UID and GID from the source mailbox.  This method works only
with local mailboxes, i.e.: @samp{mbox} (UNIX mailbox), @samp{maildir}
and @samp{mh}.

@item copy-name
Get owner name from the source mailbox URL and obtain UID and GID for
this user using mailutils authorization methods.

@item set-id=@var{uid}[:@var{gid}]
Set supplied @var{uid} and @var{gid}.  If @var{gid} is not supplied,
it is read from the @file{/etc/passwd} record for this UID.

@item set-name=@var{user}
Make destination mailbox owned by @var{user}.
@end table
@end deffn

@deffn {Movemail Config} max-messages @var{count}
Defines upper limit on the number of moved messages.  Movemail will
stop after transferring @var{count} messages.

By default, the number of messages is not limited.
@end deffn

@anchor{movemail-onerror}
@deffn {Movemail Config} onerror @var{actions}
Defines what to do if an error occurs when transferring a message.
@var{actions} is a list of one or more of the following keywords:

@table @asis
@item abort
Abort the transfer and terminate the program.  This is the default
action.

@item skip
Skip to the next message.

@item delete
Delete the affected message.

@item count
Count this message as processed.
@end table

Each keyword can be prefixed with @samp{no} to reverse its meaning.
@end deffn

The following standard Mailutils statements are supported:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.6
@headitem Statement @tab Reference
@item debug         @tab @xref{debug statement}.
@item tls           @tab @xref{tls statement}.
@item mailbox       @tab @xref{mailbox statement}.
@item locking       @tab @xref{locking statement}.
@item pam           @tab @xref{pam statement}.
@item sql           @tab @xref{sql statement}.
@item virtdomain    @tab @xref{virtdomain statement}.
@item radius        @tab @xref{radius statement}.
@item ldap          @tab @xref{ldap statement}.
@item auth          @tab @xref{auth statement}.
@end multitable

@node Ownership
@subsection Setting Destination Mailbox Ownership
@UNREVISED

@node Summary
@subsection Movemail Usage Summary

@example
movemail [@var{option}...] @var{inbox} @var{destfile} [@var{password}]
@end example

The first argument, @var{inbox}, is the @acronym{url} (@pxref{Mailbox}) of
the source mailbox.  The second argument, @var{destfile}, traditionally
means destination file, i.e. the UNIX mailbox to copy messages
to.  However, mailutils @command{movemail} extends the meaning of this
parameter.  You may actually specify any valid @acronym{url} as
@var{destfile} parameter.@footnote{Rmail does not use this
feature}.

For compatibility with older implementations of @command{movemail},
the @var{source} argument can also have the form:

@example
po:@var{username}[:@var{pop-server}]
@end example

@noindent
where @var{pop-server} is the IP address or hostname of a POP3 server
to connect to and @var{username} is the name of the user on that
server.  The password is then supplied by the third argument.

It is equivalent to the following URL:

@example
pop://@var{username}[:@var{password}]@@@var{pop-server}
@end example

In fact, whenever @var{source} refers to a remote mailbox, the
@var{password} argument can be used to pass the password.  However,
the safer @dfn{ticket} method is of course preferred.

Options are one or more of the following:

@table @option
@item --emacs
Output information used by Emacs @code{rmail} interface.

@item --ignore-errors
Try to continue after errors.

@item --max-messages=@var{count}
Process at most @var{count} messages.

@item --notify
Enable biff notification.

@item --onerror=@var{kw}[,@var{kw}...]
What to do on errors.  @xref{movemail-onerror, onerror statement}, for
a description of @var{kw}.

@item -P @var{modelist}
@itemx --owner=@var{modelist}
Control mailbox ownership.  @var{modelist} is a comma-separated list
of one or more ownership change methods.
@xref{mailbox-ownership-methods}, for a description of available
methods.

This option is useful only when running @command{movemail} as root.

@item -p
@itemx --preserve
@itemx --keep-messages
Don't remove transferred messages from the source mailbox.

@item --program-id=@var{fmt}
Set program identifier for diagnostics (default: the program name).
@xref{movemail-program-id}, for a description of its argument.

@item -r
@itemx --reverse
Reverse the order of retrieved messages.

@item -u
@itemx --uidl
Use UIDLs to avoid downloading the same message twice.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Increase verbosity level.
@end table

The common options are also understood (@pxref{Common Options}).
