@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999--2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@pindex putmail
The @command{putmail} utility reads a message from its standard input
and delivers it to the specified mailbox URL.  The usage is:

@example
putmail @var{URL}
@end example

For example, to deliver mail to a local mailbox
@file{/var/spool/mail/test}:

@example
putmail /var/spool/mail/test
@end example

Of course, this would work only it the @file{test} mailbox is writable
for the user invoking @command{putmail}.

The @code{smtp} mailbox scheme can be used for remote delivery.  For
example:

@example
putmail 'smtp://mail.example.org;to=ovr'
@end example

The program will initiate SMTP dialog with the server
@samp{mail.example.org} and will send the message from its standard
input to the user @samp{ovr} on that server.

@menu
* putmail options::
* putmail configuration::
@end menu

@node putmail options
@subsection putmail options

@table @option
@item -f @var{email}
@itemx -r @var{email}
@itemx --from=@var{email}
Specify the sender address.  If not used, the current user name
will be used.

@item -l @var{name}
@itemx --language=@var{name}
Define scripting language for the next @option{--script} option.
Valid arguments are @samp{sieve}, @samp{scheme} and @samp{python}.

@item --message-id-header=@var{header}
Use this header to identify messages when logging Sieve actions

@item -s @var{name}
@itemx --script=@var{name}
Set the name of the user-defined mail filter.  @xref{MDA Scripting},
for a detailed discussion of the scripting feature.
@end table

@node putmail configuration
@subsection putmail configuration

The behavior of @command{putmail} is affected by the following configuration
statements:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.6
@headitem Statement @tab Reference
@item debug         @tab @xref{debug statement}.
@item mailbox       @tab @xref{mailbox statement}.
@item locking       @tab @xref{locking statement}.
@item pam           @tab @xref{pam statement}.
@item sql           @tab @xref{sql statement}.
@item virtdomain    @tab @xref{virtdomain statement}.
@item radius        @tab @xref{radius statement}.
@item ldap          @tab @xref{ldap statement}.
@item auth          @tab @xref{auth statement}.
@item mailer        @tab @xref{mailer statement}.
@end multitable

The utility also accepts all MDA configuration statements: @xref{Conf-mda}.
