.\" GNU Mailutils -- a suite of utilities for electronic mail
.\" Copyright (C) 1999-2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" GNU Mailutils is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" GNU Mailutils is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with GNU Mailutils.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>. 
.TH DECODEMAIL 1 "August 3, 2020" "MAILUTILS" "Mailutilst User Reference"
.SH NAME
decodemail \- decode MIME messages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.na
\fBcommand\fR\
 [\fB\-Rt\fR]\
 [\fB\-c \fICHARSET\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-charset=\fICHARSET\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-recode\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-truncate\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-no\-recode]\
 [\fB\-\-no\-truncate]\
 [\fIDEBUG\-OPTIONS\fR]\
 [\fICONFIG\-OPTIONS\fR]\
 [\fIINBOX\fR [\fIOUTBOX\fR]]
.PP
\fBcommand\fR \fIINFORMATIONAL\-OPTIONS\fR
.ad
.hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBdecodemail\fR utility is a filter program that reads
messages from the input mailbox, decodes \fItextual\fR parts of each
multipart message to 8-bit or 7-bit transfer encoding and stores the
processed messages in the output mailbox.  Non-multipart messages as
well as message parts that cannot be decoded are transferred to the
output mailbox verbatim.
.PP
A message part is considered \fItextual\fR if its \fBContent\-Type\fR
header matches one of the predefined content type patterns.  The list
of such patterns is configurable.
.PP
The
.I INBOX
and
.I OUTBOX
arguments are file names or URLs of the input and output mailboxes,
correspondingly.  The input mailbox is opened read-only and will not
be modified in any way.  In particular, the status of the processed
messages will not change.  If the output mailbox does not exist, it
will be created.  If it exists, the messages will be appended to it,
preserving any original messages that are already in it.
.PP
Both arguments can be omitted.  If \fIOUTBOX\fR is not supplied, the
resulting mailbox will be printed on the standard output in Unix
\fImbox\fR format.  If \fIINBOX\fR is not supplied, the utility will
open the system inbox for the current user and use it for input.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-charset=\fICHARSET\fR
Convert all textual parts from their original character set to the
specified charset.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-recode\fR
Convert all textual parts from their original character set to the
current character set, as specified by the \fBLC_ALL\fR or \fBLANG\fR
environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-recode\fR
Do not recode character sets.  This is the default.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-truncate\fR
If the output mailbox exists, truncate it before appending new
messages.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-truncate\fR
Keep the existing messages in the output mailbox intact.  This is the
default.
.TP
\fIDEBUG\-OPTIONS\fR, \fICONFIG\-OPTIONS\fR, \fIINFORMATIONAL-OPTIONS\fR
See
.BR mailutils\-command (1).
.SH CONTENT TYPE PATTERNS
Each element in the list of textual content types is a
.BR glob (7)
pattern that will be matched agains the actual content type and
subtype.  Each pattern has the form
.sp
.nf
.IB type / subtype
.fi
.sp
with the slash (\fB/\fR) delimiting the two parts. E.g.:
.sp
.nf
  text/*
.fi
.PP
The parser for the \fBContent\-Type\fR header is pretty
tolerant and allows, in particular, for missing subtypes.  To match
such (obsolete) content types, omit the \fB/\fIsubtype\fR part from
the pattern.
.PP
The default list of textual content type patterns is as follows:
.sp
.nf
  text/*
  application/*shell
  application/shellscript
  */x-csrc
  */x-csource
  */x-diff
  */x-patch
  */x-perl
  */x-php
  */x-python
  */x-sh
.fi
.PP
You can add new items to that list using the \fBmime.text\-type\fR
configuration statement.  E.g., in your
.B ~/.decodemail
file:
.sp
.nf
mime {
  text-type */x-ps;
}
.fi
.PP
See
.BR mailutils-config (5),
for details about the mailutils configuration files, and the following
chapter for configuration statements specific for \fBdecodemail\fR.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The following common configuration statements affect the behavior of
\fBdecodemail\fR:
.sp
.nf
.I mime
.I debug
.I mailbox
.I locking
.fi
.PP
See
.BR mailutils\-config (5)
for a detailed discussion of these.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mailutils\-command (1),
.BR mailutils\-config (5).
.SH NOTES
This manpage is a short description of a program from GNU mailutils.
For a detailed discussion of GNU mailutils and its components,
including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the 
\fBGNU Mailutils Manual\fR available in texinfo format.  If the \fBinfo\fR
reader and \fBGNU mailutils\fR documentation are properly installed on your
system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info mailutils
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.  Similarly, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info decodemail
.RE
.PP
will bring you the documentation about this program.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B https://www.gnu.org/software/mailutils/manual
.RE
.PP
Additional documentation about GNU mailutils can be found at
.PP
.RS +4
.B https://mailutils.org/wiki
.RE
.PP
Should any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBGNU Mailutils Manual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug\-mailutils@gnu.org>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1999-2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

